AGENT.md, before:

# SwanLake — LLM Field Guide

Concise reference for language-model agents working on the SwanLake codebase.

## Snapshot
- **Purpose**: Arrow Flight SQL server backed by DuckDB with optional DuckLake extensions.
- **Runtime**: Rust async service (`tokio`) exposing prepared statements, streaming results, and session-scoped state.
- **Sessions**: Each gRPC connection owns a DuckDB connection; idle sessions auto-expire (default 30 min).
- **Performance**: Schema discovery runs `SELECT * FROM ({query}) LIMIT 0`, cutting duplicate execution cost about in half.

## Code Map
- `src/main.rs` — bootstrap: config load, tracing, gRPC server, session janitor.
- `src/config.rs` — layered config (env > CLI `--config` > `.env`/defaults).
- `src/session/` — session registry, per-session state, ID helpers.
- `src/service/` — Arrow Flight SQL handlers (queries, updates, prepared flow).
- `src/engine/` — DuckDB connection factory, schema extraction helpers.
- `tests/runner/` — integration harness using the same Flight API as clients.
- `examples/go-*/` — Go ADBC and `sqlx` samples that double as smoke tests.

## Build & Run
```bash
# optional: pull prebuilt DuckDB libs and export env vars
scripts/setup_duckdb.sh
source .duckdb/env.sh

# run the server
cargo run
```

## Configuration Cheatsheet
All env vars use the `SWANLAKE_` prefix.

| Key | Meaning | Default |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `HOST` | gRPC bind address | `127.0.0.1` |
| `PORT` | gRPC port | `4214` |
| `DUCKDB_PATH` | DuckDB database path (empty → in-memory) | _(unset)_ |
| `MAX_SESSIONS` | Concurrent session cap | `100` |
| `SESSION_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` | Idle timeout | `1800` |
| `DUCKLAKE_ENABLE` | Load DuckLake extension | `true` |
| `DUCKLAKE_INIT_SQL` | Post-load SQL hook | _(unset)_ |
| `LOG_FORMAT` | `compact` \| `json` | `compact` |
| `LOG_ANSI` | Colored logs | `true` |

Precedence: env > CLI `--config` > `config.toml` > `.env`.

## Flight SQL Behaviour
- **Queries**: `CommandStatementQuery` ➜ `get_flight_info_statement` ➜ `do_get_statement`.
- **Updates/DDL**: `CommandStatementUpdate` ➜ `do_put_statement_update`.
- **Prepared flow**: `CreatePreparedStatement` yields handle + schema, followed by `GetFlightInfo`/`DoGet` (queries) or `DoPut` (updates).
- **Detection**: `is_query_statement()` strips comments and inspects the first keyword; SELECT/WITH/SHOW/etc. route to query path, everything else goes to update path.
- **Metadata**: Responses attach `x-swanlake-total-rows` / `x-swanlake-total-bytes` when available.

## Testing & Tooling
- `./scripts/test-integration.sh` — end-to-end (builds server, runs Go client tests).
- `cargo test` — Rust unit/integration suite.
- `examples/go-adbc/main.go` — quick manual smoke test (`SWANLAKE_PORT=50051 go run main.go`).
- Logs to watch: `"SwanLake Flight SQL server listening..."`, `"session created"`, `"Cleaned up X idle sessions"`.

## Common Agent Tasks
- **Add config option**: extend `ServerConfig` in `src/config.rs`, wire defaults + docs (`README.md`, possibly `AGENT.md`).
- **Extend Flight endpoints**: implement handler in `src/service/…`, add DuckDB helper if required, cover with Go example/Rust test.
- **Investigate performance**: run with `RUST_LOG=debug`, inspect schema-optimization logs, verify DuckDB calls use `spawn_blocking`.

## Further Reading
- `README.md` — project overview, highlights, license.
- `docs/session.md` — session lifecycle & metadata contract.

Keep responses crisp, prefer concrete file references, and preserve the session-centric design.

Commit message:

init implement of duckling_queue (#4)
* init impl

* make code more robost

* config swanlake name

* local ducklake test

* simplify code

* fix clippy and comment

* resolve double lock issue

* refactor flush logic

* add warn msg

* fix fmt and clippy in ci

* fix push error

* Auto-fix formatting and clippy issues

* use action

* support force clean up

* switch all session file before seal file

* use single connection

* check in

* test pass

* use postgres for test

* use uuid in file path

* refactor code

* review code and fix ci

* impl cleanup

---------

Co-authored-by: github-actions[bot] <github-actions[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

AGENT.md, after:

# SwanLake — LLM Field Guide

Concise reference for language-model agents working on the SwanLake codebase.

## Snapshot
- **Purpose**: Arrow Flight SQL server backed by DuckDB with optional DuckLake extensions.
- **Runtime**: Rust async service (`tokio`) exposing prepared statements, streaming results, and session-scoped state.
- **Sessions**: Each gRPC connection owns a DuckDB connection; idle sessions auto-expire (default 30 min).
- **Performance**: Schema discovery runs `SELECT * FROM ({query}) LIMIT 0`, cutting duplicate execution cost about in half.

## Code Map
- `src/main.rs` — bootstrap: config load, tracing, gRPC server, session janitor.
- `src/config.rs` — layered config (env > CLI `--config` > `.env`/defaults).
- `src/session/` — session registry, per-session state, ID helpers.
- `src/service/` — Arrow Flight SQL handlers (queries, updates, prepared flow).
- `src/engine/` — DuckDB connection factory, schema extraction helpers.
- `tests/runner/` — integration harness using the same Flight API as clients.
- `examples/go-*/` — Go ADBC and `sqlx` samples that double as smoke tests.

## Build & Run
```bash
# optional: pull prebuilt DuckDB libs and export env vars
scripts/setup_duckdb.sh
source .duckdb/env.sh

# run the server
cargo run
```

## Configuration Cheatsheet
All env vars use the `SWANLAKE_` prefix. See [Configuration.md](Configuration.md) for the up-to-date
table covering defaults and descriptions. Quick reminders:
- Host/port/pool sizes influence the Flight endpoint + DuckDB pools.
- `ENABLE_WRITES`, `MAX_SESSIONS`, and `SESSION_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` gate write workloads and cleanup.
- `DUCKLAKE_INIT_SQL` runs immediately after DuckDB boots (attach remote storage, etc.).
- Duckling Queue knobs (`DUCKLING_QUEUE_*`) control staging paths plus rotation/flush behavior.

Precedence: env > CLI `--config` > `config.toml` > `.env`.

## Flight SQL Behaviour
- **Queries**: `CommandStatementQuery` ➜ `get_flight_info_statement` ➜ `do_get_statement`.
- **Updates/DDL**: `CommandStatementUpdate` ➜ `do_put_statement_update`.
- **Prepared flow**: `CreatePreparedStatement` yields handle + schema, followed by `GetFlightInfo`/`DoGet` (queries) or `DoPut` (updates).
- **Detection**: `is_query_statement()` strips comments and inspects the first keyword; SELECT/WITH/SHOW/etc. route to query path, everything else goes to update path.
- **Metadata**: Responses attach `x-swanlake-total-rows` / `x-swanlake-total-bytes` when available.
- **Duckling Queue admin command**: `PRAGMA duckling_queue.flush;` bypasses the async worker by rotating the active file and flushing every sealed DB immediately (handy for CI/tests).

## Testing & Tooling
- `./scripts/test-integration.sh` — end-to-end (builds server, runs Go client tests).
- `cargo test` — Rust unit/integration suite.
- `examples/go-adbc/main.go` — quick manual smoke test (`SWANLAKE_PORT=50051 go run main.go`).
- Logs to watch: `"SwanLake Flight SQL server listening..."`, `"session created"`, `"Cleaned up X idle sessions"`.

## Common Agent Tasks
- **Add config option**: extend `ServerConfig` in `src/config.rs`, wire defaults + docs (`README.md`, possibly `AGENT.md`).
- **Extend Flight endpoints**: implement handler in `src/service/…`, add DuckDB helper if required, cover with Go example/Rust test.
- **Investigate performance**: run with `RUST_LOG=debug`, inspect schema-optimization logs, verify DuckDB calls use `spawn_blocking`.

## Further Reading
- `README.md` — project overview, highlights, license.
- `docs/session.md` — session lifecycle & metadata contract.

Keep responses crisp, prefer concrete file references, and preserve the session-centric design.
