README.md, before:

[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/swanlake-io/swanlake/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/swanlake-io/swanlake)


# SwanLake

SwanLake is a Rust-based Arrow Flight SQL server backed by DuckDB with optional DuckLake extensions. It delivers per-connection sessions, streaming analytics, and a compact deployment footprint.

## Highlights
- Arrow Flight SQL endpoint with prepared statement and streaming result support
- Session-scoped DuckDB connections for predictable state management
- Optional DuckLake extension loading and initialization hooks
- Structured logging and configurability via environment variables or `config.toml`

## Quick Start
```bash
# (optional) Download the prebuilt DuckDB libraries and export env vars
scripts/setup_duckdb.sh
source .duckdb/env.sh

# Run SwanLake
cargo run
```

## Configuration
Key environment variables (all prefixed with `SWANLAKE_`):

| Variable | Description | Default |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `HOST` | Bind address | `127.0.0.1` |
| `PORT` | gRPC port | `4214` |
| `DUCKDB_PATH` | DuckDB database path (blank = in-memory) | _unset_ |
| `MAX_SESSIONS` | Concurrent session limit | `100` |
| `SESSION_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` | Idle session timeout | `1800` |
| `DUCKLAKE_ENABLE` | Auto-load DuckLake extension | `true` |
| `DUCKLAKE_INIT_SQL` | SQL executed after DuckLake loads | _unset_ |
| `LOG_FORMAT` | `compact` or `json` | `compact` |
| `LOG_ANSI` | Enable ANSI colors | `true` |

`.env` files are read automatically via `dotenvy`. Command-line flags always override file-based configuration.

## Testing

### Integration Tests
- `./scripts/test-integration.sh` builds the server and runs the Go ADBC client flow.
- `examples/go-adbc` and `examples/go-sqlx` provide minimal client samples for manual testing.

### SQL Logic Tests
The standalone test runner (`tests/runner`) executes SQL logic tests against a running SwanLake server:

```bash
# Start the server
cargo run

# In another terminal, run SQL tests
cd tests/runner
cargo run -- --endpoint grpc://127.0.0.1:4214 ../../tests/sql/ducklake_basic.test

# Or use the helper script
./scripts/run_ducklake_tests.sh
```

The test runner uses Arrow 56.x for ADBC compatibility, while the main project uses Arrow 57.x.

## Documentation
- `AGENT.md` offers a guided tour of the architecture for contributors.
- `docs/session.md` explains session lifecycle, metadata, and protocol handling.

## License

Licensed under the MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

Commit message:

init implement of duckling_queue (#4)
* init impl

* make code more robost

* config swanlake name

* local ducklake test

* simplify code

* fix clippy and comment

* resolve double lock issue

* refactor flush logic

* add warn msg

* fix fmt and clippy in ci

* fix push error

* Auto-fix formatting and clippy issues

* use action

* support force clean up

* switch all session file before seal file

* use single connection

* check in

* test pass

* use postgres for test

* use uuid in file path

* refactor code

* review code and fix ci

* impl cleanup

---------

Co-authored-by: github-actions[bot] <github-actions[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

README.md, after:

[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/swanlake-io/swanlake/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/swanlake-io/swanlake)

# SwanLake

SwanLake is a Rust-based Arrow Flight SQL server backed by DuckDB with optional DuckLake extensions. It delivers per-connection sessions, streaming analytics, and a compact deployment footprint.

## Highlights
- Arrow Flight SQL endpoint with prepared statement and streaming result support
- Session-scoped DuckDB connections for predictable state management
- Optional DuckLake extension loading and initialization hooks
- Duckling Queue staging layer with `PRAGMA duckling_queue.flush` for crash-resilient write buffering
- Structured logging and configurability via environment variables or `config.toml`

## Quick Start
```bash
# (optional) Download the prebuilt DuckDB libraries and export env vars
scripts/setup_duckdb.sh
source .duckdb/env.sh

# Run SwanLake
cargo run
```

## Configuration
All configuration options (env vars + defaults) live in [Configuration.md](Configuration.md).
Highlights:
- `SWANLAKE_HOST` / `SWANLAKE_PORT` control the Flight endpoint bind address.
- `SWANLAKE_ENABLE_WRITES`, `SWANLAKE_MAX_SESSIONS`, and `SWANLAKE_SESSION_TIMEOUT_SECONDS`
  gate write access and session lifecycle.
- `SWANLAKE_DUCKLAKE_INIT_SQL` runs custom SQL immediately after DuckDB starts.
- Duckling Queue settings (root path, rotation/flush thresholds, target schema) are also covered there.

`.env` files are read automatically via `dotenvy`. Command-line flags always override file-based configuration.

Every session can create or insert into `duckling_queue.*` tables. Use
`PRAGMA duckling_queue.flush;` to force the active file to rotate and flush immediately (handy for tests and CI).

## Testing

### Integration Tests
- `./scripts/test-integration.sh` builds the server and runs the Go ADBC client flow.
- `examples/go-adbc` and `examples/go-sqlx` provide minimal client samples for manual testing.

### SQL Logic Tests
The standalone test runner (`tests/runner`) executes SQL logic tests against a running SwanLake server:

```bash
bash ./scripts/run-integration-tests.sh
```

## License

Licensed under the MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.
